Python Exercises

Operators
1.
Open a Python (run python.exe from a terminal), enter the following expressions,
and observe the results.  What does each expression do?  
Play around with variations of the expressions using different numbers:
8			    8 / 12
8 * 2			8 // 12
8 ** 2			8 / 0

Basic prgorams - print()
2.
Write a Python program that displays the string "Hello, world!" to the screen.

3.
Write a Python program that prints (displays) your name, address, and telephone number.

Basic programs - expressions
4.
Write a Python program to calculate and display the area of a rectangle. The program
should ask for inputs for length and height of the rectangle, and then use the
formula length * height.

5.
Write a Python program to calculate and display the area of a triangle. The program
should ask for inputs for base length and height of the triangle, and then use the 
formula 0.5 * base * height.

6.
An employee’s total weekly pay equals the hourly wage multiplied by the total number 
of regular hours plus any overtime pay. Overtime pay equals the total overtime hours 
multiplied by 1.5 times the hourly wage. Write a program that takes as inputs the 
hourly wage, total regular hours, and total overtime hours and displays an employee’s 
total weekly pay

Introducing modules
7.
Write a Python function to calculate the area of a circle. You will need to ask the user
for the radius of the circle and then use the formula pi * radius squared. 
Hint: You will need to import pi from the math module

8.
Write a program that takes the radius of a sphere (a floating-point number) as input 
and then outputs the sphere’s diameter, circumference, surface area, and volume.
(You may need to look up formulae for these calculations online)

Data type conversion
9.
Write a Python program that accepts the user’s name (as text) and age (as a number) as input. 
The program should output a sentence containing the user’s name and age.

Creating functions
10.
Take exercises 4 and 5 above (area of rectangle, area of triangle) and create
functions for these calculations.  Call the functions to calculate the areas of several
rectangles and triangles.  Bonus:  Store the functions in a separate file and import them.

11.
Write a python program that saves the current date and time ("now") as a variable.
Display this, then seperately displays the current year, month, hour, minute, and weekday.
Bonus: see if you can display the date in the format "Friday, 13 September 2024, 15:12:34"

12.
Write a function that takes a user's name and age as input.  The function should output a
greeting and tell them their year of birth. (Might be off by 1 depending on birthday.)  
Bonus:  Ask for birthday (or birthmonth) and then adjust if they've had a birthday this year

If/Else
13.  
Write a program that accepts the lengths of three sides of a triangle as inputs.
The program output should indicate if the triangle is equilateral
(if all the sides are the same length).  Create this as a function which returns
a boolean value.  Run an if/else test that produces a different message based on
whether the triangle input is equilateral.

Lists
14.
Write a program that takes a list of integers as input and then returns the 
average of the numbers in the list.

15.
Write a function that takes a string as input and then returns the reverse 
of that string.
eg. "abcde" becomes "edcba"

Games
16.
Write a guessing game.  Have the computer think of a random number between 0
and 100.  Ask the player to guess the number.  Tell them if their guess 
is too high or too low or if they guessed the correct number. Track how many
guesses it takes for the player to guess the number.
Bonus:  give the player a fixed number of guesses and make them 'lose' if 
they take too many guesses.
Hint:  you'll need a specific function from the 'random' module to have the 
computer think of a number.

17.  Write a program that plays the game 'rock, paper, scissors.'  The computer 
should play a move at the same time as a move is input from the user.
A user should be told if their move is not valid.  The game should specifiy if
the player wins, loses, or draws with the computer.
Bonus 1:  keep score counters of how many games the player has won, drawn, 
and lost.
Bonus 1a: Can you save this score in a file?
Bonus 2:  Expand the game to be the version from The Big Bang Theory:  rock,
paper, scissors, lizard, Spock.

Back to lists
18.  Back to lists.  Create a program that has a list of names.  Let the user add
names to the list.
Bonus:  Adjust the program so that names can also be removed from the list

Tkinter
19.
Create a tkinter application that gets the user to enter their name, address, 
and e-mail address.  It should display the values that they enter in a 
formatted string, on a label. 
Bonus:  Display the output in a pop-up message box. 

20. Using question 6 above (employee’s total weekly pay).  
Create a tkinter application that takes input of the users data and calculates
and displays their weekly pay. 

21. 
Create a tkinter application with an entry box, a button, and a list box. 
The user should be able to type some text into the entry box, click the button and 
have the text added to the list box. 
Bonus:  Let the user select a line of text from the list box and remove it from the list.

22. 
Create a tkinter application that lets the user order a meal from a fast-food restaurant. 
For example, a in Subway-style restaurant.  You might ask the user what bread they would
like, what cheese, and what salads.   Use a combination of entry boxes, radio buttons, 
check buttons and combo boxes to let the user place their order. 
Hint – RadioButtons, CheckButtons, and ComboBoxes need to use tkinter variables. 
Once the user has made all their selections, create a formatted string containing
their order.  Once you have this string you can: 
a) display it in a label 
b) display it in a pop-up messagebox
and/or
c) save it to a file. 

24.
Create a tkinter app that allows the user to roll a dice.  Find images on the Internet
that you can use to display the faces of the dice.

25.
Create a text file that has several usernames and passwords stored in the 
format “username,password” eg. “bob,pass123”.  There should be 1 username
and password per line in the file. Create a tkinter app that asks the user
to type their username and password. The app should read the file and check
if their username and password is correct and display a message 
letting the user know whether they were authenticated successfully. 

26. 
Create a converter application.  Examples include Celcius to Farenheit,
metres to feet, kilograms to pounds, kilojoules to calories.
Code your app to convert values in both directions.
Add a 'log' that will store conversions in a file.  The log should include
the date and time of conversion. Allow the user to display the log.  
The file should display in a list box or TreeView.
Bonus:  Display the log in a new window.  This will be a tkinter Toplevel object.
Add a button to close the new window. 

27.
Update your converter to allow for multiple conversions 
(eg. temperature AND distance AND weight, etc.) 
For a distance calculation, apply rounding.  e.g. 6 metres becomes
'4 feet 11 inches' rather than 4.9212 feet.

28.
Update any of your tkinter apps to allow for event binding.
e.g. create keyboard shortcuts for button presses
e.g. allow the user to press the 'enter' key to calculate
e.g. have an action occur when the mouse moves over an item or
clicks on something


29. 
Convert the guessing game in question 16 to a tkinter application 

30. 
Convert the rock, paper, scissors game to a tkinter application.